Neoplasms change over time through a process of cell-level evolution, driven by genetic and epigenetic alterations. However, the ecology of the microenvironment of a neoplastic cell determines which changes provide adaptive benefits. There is widespread recognition of the importance of these evolutionary and ecological processes in cancer, but to date, no system has been proposed for drawing clinically relevant distinctions between how different tumours are evolving. On the basis of a consensus conference of experts in the fields of cancer evolution and cancer ecology, we propose a framework for classifying tumours that is based on four relevant components. These are the diversity of neoplastic cells (intratumoural heterogeneity) and changes over time in that diversity, which make up an evolutionary index (Evo-index), as well as the hazards to neoplastic cell survival and the resources available to neoplastic cells, which make up an ecological index (Eco-index). We review evidence demonstrating the importance of each of these factors and describe multiple methods that can be used to measure them. Development of this classification system holds promise for enabling clinicians to personalize optimal interventions based on the evolvability of the patient’s tumour. The Evo- and Eco-indices provide a common lexicon for communicating about how neoplasms change in response to interventions, with potential implications for clinical trials, personalized medicine and basic cancer research.

Neoplasms evolve1–3. This evolution has been recognized since 1976 (REF. 4), and it explains the processes of both carcinogenesis and acquired therapeutic resistance1. The evolution of neoplasms is shaped by the selective pressures of their microenvironmental ecology. But between and within cancer types, tumours probably display differences in the dynamics of cancer evolution and ecology, including the rates at which new clones appear and go extinct, how different those clones are from one another and whether they appear in bursts or at a more regular pace. Many of the evolutionary and ecological properties of a neoplasm are clinically relevant5–16, though this is not always true6,16,17, and in most cases their clinical relevance has not yet been tested. There is a need for a common language and conceptual categories for drawing clinical distinctions that capture the relevant genetic, environmental and kinetic parameters that impact tumour adaptation and progression, as well as response to therapy. A classification system for the evolution and ecology of neoplasms would provide clinicians and researchers with a foundation for developing better prognostic and predictive assessments of tumour behaviour, such as response to an intervention.

The ultimate purpose of a classification system for the evolution and ecology of neoplasms is to provide a descriptive tool by which to improve clinical management with respect to the overall survival and quality of life of the patient. It would also help to drive research and discovery in cancer biology and oncology.

Below, we discuss the methods by which we reached consensus as well as the goals and guiding principles we aspired to in the development of a framework for classifying neoplasms. We then discuss each of the components of the classification system as well as methods for measuring them and for dividing tumours into an initial set of 16 classes. We discuss how such a classification system could be developed, improved and used clinically in the future.

Go to:
Methods
We convened a consensus conference of experts in the fields of cancer evolution and cancer ecology to lay the groundwork for the development of an evolutionary and ecological classification system. The initial participants (Maley, Aktipis, Graham, Sottoriva, Boddy, Janiszewska, Silva, Gerlinger, Anderson, Brown and Shibata) were among the faculty for the Evolution and Ecology of Cancer summer school funded by Wellcome and held at the Wellcome Genome Campus in Hinxton, UK, in July of 2016. Input from all participants was solicited, and after discussion, we identified areas of consensus. Afterwards, other leaders in the field were invited to join the effort by co-editing and discussing the developing statement. All authors reviewed and approved the final statement. Wellcome Genome Campus Advanced Courses and Scientific Conferences provided financial support for the consensus meeting. We have named the classification system, with their permission, in appreciation of Wellcome’s support. Please note that the statement reflects the opinions of the authors and not necessarily those of Wellcome.

Go to:
Goals and guiding principles
Our development of this framework has been guided by several goals and principles. We agreed that an ideal classification system should have the following properties. First, it must be able to alter a clinical decision point. Second, it should be simple enough to be easily remembered and applied. Third, it should also align with our current understanding of the dynamics of neoplasms. Fourth, the classification system should be general enough to be applied across different types of neoplasm, recognizing that the types of measurement may need to be individualized to a given type of cancer.

This framework is based on fundamental theoretical principles underlying evolutionary and ecological dynamics. It is not based on any particular assay or parameter but rather captures the fundamental drivers of tumour evolution. This is a necessary first step that we hope will lead to many methodological and measurement innovations to quantify the key components of tumour evolution and ecology that we identify here. Because the evolution of cancer is still a relatively new field, there is still uncertainty about the best ways to measure and describe the evolution and ecology of a tumour.

There are also practical considerations in the construction of a classification system. If a tumour could be classified based on a single biopsy from standard assays such as those that can be done on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue or standard radiological images, translation to the clinic would be relatively easy. However, studies have not yet been done to test whether measures of the evolvability of a tumour from a single biopsy sample are sufficient or whether multiple samples substantially improve predictions of clinical outcomes15. We hypothesize that we will need to extensively sample neoplasms over both space and time in order to accurately quantify their evolvability, but this remains an open question. It is clear, however, that evolutionary analyses are limited if the clonal structure of the primary tumour is unknown18. The use of cell-free DNA (cfDNA) from liquid biopsy samples should facilitate longitudinal studies19, although deconvoluting the clones within such a mixed sample remains a challenge20.

Go to:
Framework for classifying tumour evolution
There are many well-established ways to classify tumours, largely based on extent of spread and morphological appearances (for example, stage and grade). An evolutionary classification system would augment current schemes by further capturing the evolvability of a tumour. How much intrinsic genetic instability does it have? How likely is it to respond quickly to a new selective pressure such as a therapeutic intervention? For example, rapid progression after chemotherapy is probably driven by pre-existing resistant variants, and therefore, failure is more likely in tumours with more subclonal diversity (intratumoural heterogeneity)6. Moreover, it would be useful to classify evolution through time. For example, a second biopsy from the same patient after therapy may reveal minimal diversity, indicating a recurrent tumour derived from a single clone, or substantial diversity, suggesting intrinsic resistance by the majority of tumour cells. There was widespread agreement at the consensus conference that both the evolutionary dynamics of the neoplastic cells themselves (cancer cell intrinsic factors) and the microenvironment that defines the ecology of those cells (cancer cell extrinsic factors) are important in predicting the future behaviour and response of a tumour. To capture this, we have developed a framework for both an evolutionary index (Evo-index) that describes the intrinsic evolvability of the neoplastic cell population and an ecological index (Eco-index) that describes potential selective pressures imposed by the surrounding microenvironment.

Go to:
The Evo-index
The Evo-index (D#Δ#) is a combination of two fundamental components: the diversity (D) or intratumoural heterogeneity of the neoplasm and how it changes over time (Δ). In other words, the Evo-index quantifies heterogeneity in both space and time (FIG. 1a). Both diversity and changes in the clonal structure of a tumour over time are objective measures and may be assessed as part of preclinical studies or clinical trials.

An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
Object name is nihms939413f1.jpg
Figure 1
The Evo-index and how it changes
a | The evolutionary index (Evo-index) is composed of two factors corresponding to heterogeneity over space (diversity, D) and heterogeneity over time (change over time, Δ). By ‘change’, we mean both change in the genetic, epigenetic and phenotypic alterations present in the population and change in the frequencies of those alterations in the neoplastic cell population. What measures of D and Δ are best is an open question. In addition, how these factors should be stratified into two, three or more classes is also an open question. Here, for simplicity, we provide examples of the kinds of dynamics that could be categorized into a simple 2 × 2 classification. b | The genetic composition of a tumour may change either slowly (Δ1) or rapidly (Δ2) in a variety of ways. On the left, a tumour may have low diversity (D1) at time 0 because it is a new tumour or there has been a recent homogenizing clonal expansion. That tumour may be quiescent and so appear substantially the same at time 1 (D1Δ1), or it may accumulate clones, some of which expand, to generate a diverse tumour by time 1 (D2Δ2). Alternatively, a tumour may be diverse (D2) at time 0 because it is old or has a high mutation rate and is evolving neutrally. At time 1, that tumour may have been homogenized by a selective sweep (D1Δ2) or may continue on its current trajectory with gradual turnover of its clones (D2Δ1).

Diversity

The heterogeneity that is currently present in a population defines its capacity to respond, at a population level, to selective pressures. This diversity is the fuel for the engine of natural selection. There are different forms of diversity, including genetic diversity, epigenetic diversity, phenotypic diversity and functional diversity. Genetic diversity can predict progression to invasive cancers12,13 as well as recurrence and survival5–9,16. The relationship between diversity and clinical outcomes is not universally consistent across different cancer types6,16 and can be complicated (BOX 1).

Box 1

Important issues in the measurement of diversity in neoplasms

There are a number of important issues and open questions in the measurement of diversity in neoplasms: How are clones defined? What is the best measure of diversity? How do the measures scale up to genomic assays? Are there nonlinear associations between diversity and clinical outcomes? Is genetic or functional diversity more predictive? Is it sufficient to measure diversity in the primary tumour, or do we need to measure diversity in the metastases? Is it adequate to estimate diversity from bulk biopsy assays, or do we need to measure diversity at the single-cell level?

In order to measure diversity, one must first define the unit that is being measured. We typically cluster cells into clones, but there is currently no general definition of a clone. Typically, for expediency, clones are defined as the set of cells that share an alteration of interest, due to descent from a common ancestor cell. A more stringent definition of a clone is a set of cells that have the same genotype based on some assay12,13. However, that definition does not scale well to whole-genome assays because every neoplastic cell probably displays a unique genome. By contrast, measures of divergence between samples only become more accurate as assays scale up to the genomic level12–14,46. Another alternative would be to reconstruct the cell lineage (phylogeny) of a neoplasm and then define clones based on the topology of the cell lineage, although this is not straightforward. A similar problem has been addressed by viral and bacterial phylogenetics, and methods may be borrowed from these fields167,168.

It is not clear which alterations should be used to measure diversity. Some forms of diversity, such as mutations in exons and copy number changes, may be more clinically relevant than other forms of diversity. However, Merlo and colleagues found that defining a clone based on selectively advantageous mutations and defining a clone based on evolutionarily neutral mutations both predicted progression to cancer13.

Instead of genetics, one could measure diversity based on RNA expression or other phenotypic characteristics169,170. Because selection acts on phenotypes, this may be a better predictor of a the evolvability of a tumour than genetic measures of diversity. Gatenby and colleagues have argued that because of this and the fact that there are many different genotypes that can produce the same phenotype, analysis at the phenotype level may be easier and provide a better measure of evolvability than analysis at the genotype level171,172. However, this hypothesis is controversial, and only a few studies have tested it173,174. Unfortunately, the literature on how to measure functional diversity remains poorly developed30.

The diversity of the primary tumour may differ from that of any metastases. Because the primary tumour is often removed and it is the metastases that kill patients, we may have to measure diversity within and between any metastases that can be sampled in order to best predict clinical outcomes2.

It is currently difficult to measure many loci or phenotypes at the single-cell level. Bulk sequencing or other assays at the biopsy level introduce significant biases. For example, recent mutations that are present in only a single cell or a small minority of cells are missed in bulk assays, biasing results to the early mutations and those mutations driving clonal expansion175. Preliminary analyses show that a mixture of clones within a biopsy sample can also mislead any analyses based on estimates of shared ancestry, such as phylogenetic reconstruction176. However, it is currently difficult to assay enough loci in enough single cells to reconstruct reliable cell lineages and identify rare clones177.